Notes on Lectures 1 - 4
#######################

Basic Accounting Concepts
=========================

- **Accounting** is a system which **identifies**, **records**, and
  **communicates** information that is **relevant**, **reliable**, and
  **comparable** to help users make better decisions.

- Users off accounting information

  - External users: lenders, consumer groups, shareholders, external auditors,
    governments, customers, etc.

  - Internal users: managers, sales staff, officers/directors, budget officers,
    internal auditors, controllers, etc.

- Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)

  - Relevant information - Affects the decision of its users.

  - Reliable information - Is trusted by users.

  - Comparable information - Is helpful in contrasting organisations.

- **Accounting Equation**

  - **Assets = Liabilities + Equity**

- Assets: Resources owned or controlled by a company

  - Cash, accounts/notes receivable, land, buildings, equipment, vehicles,
    store supplies, etc.

- Liabilities: Creditors' claims on assets

  - Accounts/notes payable, taxes payable, wages payable, etc.

- Equity: Owner's share of assets of a company

  - Owner's investment (capital), reserves (accumulated profits).

- How does the owner's **equity increases**?

  1. Investment of assets by the owner *into* the business.

  2. Revenue.

- How does the owner's **equity decrease**?

  1. Withdrawal of assets by the owner *out of* the business.

  2. Expenses.


Transaction Analysis
====================

- If a bank lends you $5000, your assets increase by that amount. But your
  liabilities also increase by the same amount

  - Assets = Liabilities + Equity

  - 5000 = 5000 + Equity

- If you buy a photocopy machine (an equipment) worth $1000 with that money,

  - you are buying an asset (equipment), so your assets increase.

  - you are also spending cash (another asset), so your assets decrease as
    well.

  - 5000 + 1000 - 1000 = 5000 + Equity

Principles and Assumptions of Accounting
----------------------------------------

- Revenue Recognition Principle

  - Recognise revenue when it is earned.

  - When is it earned? When the product or service has been delivered to
    customer.

- Cost Principle

  - Accounting information is based on actual cost. Actual cost is considered
    objective.

- Matching principle

  - A company must record its expenses incurred to generate the revenue
    reported.

- Full Disclosure Principle

  - A company is required to report the details behind financial statements
    that would impact users' decisions.

Revenue Recognition Principle
-----------------------------

- Revenue is **earned** when the product or service has been **delivered to the
  customer**.

- Exchange of cash in not necessary.

- If the cash is not received at the time of delivery of the product/service,
  it is **accounts receivable**. It is still revenue even though the cash has
  not been received.

- If the cash is obtained before the product/service is delivered, it must be
  recorded as **unearned revenue** which is a **liability**. You owe the
  customer the product/service or the cash back.

Expanded Accounting Equation
----------------------------

- Assets = Liabilities + Equity

- Equity increases when owner invests assets or when revenue is earned.

- Equity decreases when owner withdraws assets or when expenses are incurred.

- Putting these together:

  - **Assets = Liabilities + Owner's capital + Revenues - Owner's withdrawals -
    Expenses**

Transaction Analysis
--------------------

- Accounting equation **must** *remain in balance* after each transaction.


- You invest $20k to start a business. The accounts involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes up

  - Owner's capital (equity) - goes up

- You purchase office supplies paying $1k. The accounts involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes down

  - Supplies (asset) - goes up

- You purchase equipment for $15k. The accounts involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes down

  - Equipment (asset) - goes up

- You purchase supplies of $200 and equipment of $1k *on account* (on credit -
  payable later). The accounts involved are:

  - Supplies (asset) - goes up

  - Equipment (asset) - goes up

  - Accounts payable (liability) - goes up

- You borrow $4k from the bank. The accounts involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes up

  - Notes payable (liability) - goes up

+--------------------------------+----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Assets                         | Liabilities                      | Equity          |
+=========+==========+===========+==================+===============+=================+
| Cash    | Supplies | Equipment | Accounts payable | Notes payable | Owner's capital |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
| 20,000  |          |           |                  |               | 20,000          |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
| -1,000  | 1,000    |           |                  |               |                 |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
| -15,000 |          | 15,000    |                  |               |                 |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
|         | 200      | 1000      | 1,200            |               |                 |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
| 4,000   |          |           |                  | 4,000         |                 |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
| 8,000   | 1,200    | 16,000    | 1,200            | 4,000         | 20,000          |
+---------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+
| 25,200                         | 25,200                                             |
+--------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+

- You provide consulting services and receive $3k in cash. The accounts
  involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes up

  - Revenue (equity) - goes up

- Paid salaries of $800 to employees. The accounts involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes down

  - Expenses (equity) - goes up. But total equity decreases because expenses
    decrease equity.

- You withdraw $500. The accounts involved are:

  - Cash (asset) - goes down

  - Withdrawals (equity) - goes up. Again, total equity decreases because
    withdrawals decrease equity.

+-------------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Assets                        | Liabilities                      | Equity                                     |
+========+==========+===========+==================+===============+=========+=============+=========+==========+
| Cash   | Supplies | Equipment | Accounts payable | Notes payable | Capital | Withdrawals | Revenue | Expenses |
+--------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+---------+-------------+---------+----------+
| 8,000  | 1,200    | 16,000    | 1,200            | 4,000         | 20,000  |             |         |          |
+--------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+---------+-------------+---------+----------+
| 3,000  |          |           |                  |               |         |             | 3,000   |          |
+--------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+---------+-------------+---------+----------+
| -800   |          |           |                  |               |         |             |         | 800      |
+--------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+---------+-------------+---------+----------+
| -500   |          |           |                  |               |         | 500         |         |          |
+--------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+---------+-------------+---------+----------+
| 9,700  | 1,200    | 16,000    | 1,200            | 4,000         | 20,000  | (-) 500     | 3,000   | (-) 800  |
+--------+----------+-----------+------------------+---------------+---------+-------------+---------+----------+
| 26,900                        | 26,900                                                                        |
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+


Introduction to Financial Statements
====================================

Financial statements
--------------------

1. Income statement

2. Statement of owner's equity

3. Balance sheet

4. Statement of cash flows

Income statement
----------------

- Describes a company's revenues and expenses along with the resulting net
  income or loss over a period of time due to earnings activities.

- Net income is the difference between Revenues and Expenses.

- Example::

    Some Company
    Income Statement
    For Month Ended December 31, 2017

    Revenues:
        Consulting revenues     3,000
    Expenses:
        Salaries expense          800
    Net income                  2,200

Statement of owner's equity
---------------------------

- Shows the changes in owner's equity over a period of time.

- Example::

    Some Company
    Statement of Owner's Equity
    For Month Ended December 31, 2017

    Capital, December 1, 2017                        0
    Plus:   Investment by owner     20,000
            Net income               2,200      22,200
                                ----------------------
                                                22,200
    Less:   Withdrawals by owner                   500
                                            ----------
    Capital, December 31, 2017                  21,700
                                            ----------

Balance Sheet
-------------

- Describes a company's financial position at a point in time.

- Example::

    Some Company
    Balance Sheet
    December 31, 2017

    Assets                        Liabilities & Equity
    ------------------------      ------------------------------
    Cash               9,700      Accounts payable         1,200
    Supplies           1,200      Notes payable            4,000
    Equipment         16,000                          ----------
                                  Total liabilities        5,200
                                  Owner capital           21,700
                  ----------                          ----------
                                  Total liabilities
    Total assets      26,900      and equity              26,900
                  ----------                          ----------


Statement of Cash Flows
-----------------------

- Describes cash flow between accounts.
